---
title_bar: Culture - Pair Programming
post_title: Pair Programming
post_subtitle: My Experience With This Techinque
layout: default
---
**Pair Programming** - a type of programming techinque where two people work together as "pairs" on a single computer to solve a complex problem.

In DevBootCamp, we are mandated to "pair" with another person to work on challenges. By getting used to working with other people in the classroom setting, we would be better suited to work with co-workers in a future job. During these mandatory pairing sessions, I have found that pairing was not difficult, so long as some time is spent at the beginning of the session to lay down the common framework by which both me and my pair can operate under. It was frustrating trying to communicate with the pair in case the partner is advocating for a "course of action" that I disagree with, but it was rather rewarding when we solved challenges quickly and accurately. It was also fun learning from the pair and teaching the pair as well.

After a pairing session, we write anonymous feedback on each other's performance. It was difficult for me to write feedback, as I have to meet three criteria that DevBootCamp recommends for feedback (Actionable, Specific, and Kind). I have to not only praise a person, but also come up with constructive criticism, and not accept "80%". I have to think carefully at a person's general behavior during the session and figure out individual actions that are either praiseworthy or cringeworthy, and explain them in a manner that avoids being mean in the process. This is something that I do need to keep working on, as I sometimes fail in meeting all three DevBootCamp criteria.

While I am not good at writing feedback, the feedback that I have received from my pairs have been useful. They either provide a morale boost for me, or serve to illustrate certain flaws within my programming style, such as failing to communicate my own desires to the pair and not reading directions. By identifying problems, I can be better able to remedy these problems effectively. I have to examine the feedback carefully though, and figure out how best to implement them, before DevBootCamp is complete.